Add OAuth 2.0 to Legacy Apps with Spring Cloud Gateway (#144)
oktadeveloper/okta-blog: _source/_posts/2020-01-08-oauth-legacy-spring-cloud-gateway.adoc

---
layout: blog_post

> title: "Add 2.0 OAuth to Legacy Apps with Spring Cloud Gateway"

Reviewer: Should this be "Add OAuth 2.0"?

author: bdemers

> description: "This tutorial shows show you how to secure legacy applications with OAuth 2.0 and Spring Cloud Gateway"

Reviewer: Add period at the end.

tags: [java, spring cloud gateway, legacy, spring boot, spring cloud, oauth, oidc]
tweets:
- "A low code option to secure legacy applications with Spring Cloud Gateway!"

> - "Adding OAuth 2.0 support to your existing applications is easy with Spring Cloud Gateway"

Reviewer: Add punctuation at the end of this tweet.

- "Legacy Apps + Spring Cloud Gateway == 🔒"
image: blog/oauth-legacy-spring-cloud-gateway/spring-cloud-gateway-legacy-social.png
---
:page-liquid:

One of the biggest challenges of adding OAuth 2.0 support to legacy applications is a lack of support in the underlying framework. Maybe it's homegrown, or maybe it's just old? Either way, migrating away from an old form-based login doesn't need to be so painful. In this post, I'll walk you through a low-code option using Spring Cloud Gateway and Okta.

You'll learn how to setup Spring Cloud Gateway running as a stand-alone application that proxies HTTP requests and handles the OAuth dance before forwarding the request onto your application.

image::{% asset_path 'blog/oauth-legacy-spring-cloud-gateway/spring-cloud-gateway-legacy.png' %}[alt=Spring Cloud Gateway sequence diagram,width=800,align=center]

== Create a Spring Cloud Gateway Project

The first step is to create a new project on the https://start.spring.io[Spring Initializr]. I typically create it from my IDE or the command line:

> [source,text]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[source,shell]
```
The reason I suggest changing this is because the code type shows up in the top right.

If you already have an Okta account, see the **Create a Web Application in Okta** sidebar below. Otherwise, we created a Maven plugin that configures a free Okta developer account + an OIDC app (in under a minute!).

To use it run: `./mvnw com.okta:okta-maven-plugin:setup` to create an account and configure your Spring Boot app to work with Okta.

.Create a Web Application in Okta
****
Log in to your Okta Developer account (or https://developer.okta.com/signup/[sign up] if you don't have an account).

1. From the **Applications** page, choose **Add Application**.
2. On the Create New Application page, select **Web**.
3. Give your app a memorable name, add `http://localhost:8080/login/oauth2/code/okta` as a Login redirect URI, select **Refresh Token** (in addition to **Authorization Code**), and click **Done**.

Copy the issuer (found under **API** > **Authorization Servers**), client ID, and client secret into `application.yml` for both projects.

[source,yaml]
----
okta:
  oauth2:
    issuer: ${yourOktaDomain}/oauth2/default
    client-id: ${clientId}
    client-secret: ${clientSecret}
----
****

== Configure Spring Cloud Gateway Routes

> Next, we'll configure Spring Cloud Gateway to forward routes to our legacy application. For this post, the legacy application serves two paths `/` and `/profile`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, you'll configure Spring Cloud Gateway to forward routes to your legacy application. For this post, the legacy application serves two paths `/` and `/profile`.
```

> Once again in your `application.yml` file add the following block:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once again in your `application.yml` file, add the following block:
```

====

If this is too much YAML for you, replace the above block with the following Java code in `DemoApplication`:

[source,java]
----
package com.okta.tutorial;

import org.springframework.boot.SpringApplication;
import org.springframework.boot.autoconfigure.SpringBootApplication;
import org.springframework.cloud.gateway.route.RouteLocator;
import org.springframework.cloud.gateway.route.builder.RouteLocatorBuilder;
import org.springframework.cloud.security.oauth2.gateway.TokenRelayGatewayFilterFactory;
import org.springframework.context.annotation.Bean;

@SpringBootApplication
public class DemoApplication {

    public static void main(String[] args) {
        SpringApplication.run(DemoApplication.class, args);
    }

    @Bean
    public RouteLocator customRouteLocator(RouteLocatorBuilder builder, TokenRelayGatewayFilterFactory tokenRelay) {
        return builder.routes()
                .route("servlet-app", r -> r.path("/profile", "/")
                        .filters(f -> f.filter(tokenRelay.apply()))
                        .uri("http://localhost:8000"))
                .build();
    }
}
----

That's it! Start it up by running `./mvnw spring-boot:run`.

> A quick recap before we move on: that `application.yml` has a lot going on. It contains the OAuth 2.0 configuration (issuer, client ID, client secret) everything needed to securely proxy to the legacy application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A quick recap before we move on: that `application.yml` has a lot going on. It contains the OAuth 2.0 configuration (issuer, client ID, client secret) and everything needed to securely proxy to the legacy application.
```

== Update a Legacy Application

Updating a legacy application usually isn't simple; if it were, you probably wouldn't have assigned the "legacy" label to it! To keep things focused, I've created a straightforward servlet application that contains a single servlet:

[source,java]
----
@WebServlet(name = "UserProfile", urlPatterns = {"/", "/profile"})
public class UserProfileServlet extends HttpServlet {

    @Override
    protected void doGet(HttpServletRequest request, HttpServletResponse response) throws ServletException, IOException {

        request.setAttribute("email", "jill.coder@example.com"); // faking an existing service
        Map<String, String> attributes = new HashMap<String, String>();
        attributes.put("sub", "jill.coder@example.com"); // more fake data
        request.setAttribute("userAttributes", attributes);

        request.getRequestDispatcher("/WEB-INF/user-profile.jsp").forward(request, response);
    }
}
----

> Grab the full code on https://github.com/oktadeveloper/okta-legacy-with-cloud-gateway-example/tree/original-servlet-app[GitHub] (on the `original-servlet-app` branch):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Grab the full code on https://github.com/oktadeveloper/okta-legacy-with-cloud-gateway-example/tree/original-servlet-app[GitHub] (in the `original-servlet-app` branch):
```

[source,text]
----
git clone https://github.com/oktadeveloper/okta-legacy-with-cloud-gateway-example.git -b original-servlet-app
cd okta-legacy-with-cloud-gateway-example/legacy-servlet-app
----

> The above example uses static strings, a real application likely has a form to collect a username and password along with a user service that connects to a database, use your imagination. 😉

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The above example uses static strings, a real application likely has a form to collect a username and password along with a user service that connects to a database; you can use your imagination. 😉
```

            // invalid access tokens will throw an exception
            // add the access token as a request attribute
            request.setAttribute(ACCESS_TOKEN, jwtAccessToken); // <7>
            filterChain.doFilter(request, response); // <8>
        } catch (JwtVerificationException e) {
            request.getServletContext().log("Failed to parse access token", e);
            respondWith401(response);
        }
    }

    private void respondWith401(HttpServletResponse response) throws IOException { // <9>
        response.setStatus(401);
        response.setHeader("WWW-Authenticate","Bearer");
        response.getWriter().write("Authentication required");
    }

    public void destroy() {
        tokenVerifier = null;
    }
}
----
<1> In order to validate the JWT access token the Issuer URL is required, more on this below.
<2> Create a new Okta `AccessTokenVerifier`
<3> The `Authorization` header is formatted as `Authorization: Bearer <accessToken>`
<4> Validate and decode the access token string
<5> Add the `Jwt` object to the request
<6> Continue with the request
<7> Any failures respond with a 401 status code
====

== Update the Servlet with Access Token Data

> The last step is to update the `UserProfileServlet` with data from the JWT access token. To do so, replace the `doGet` method with the one below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The last step is to update the `UserProfileServlet` with data from the JWT access token. To do so, replace the `doGet()` method with the one below:
```

====
[source,java]
----
@Override
protected void doGet(HttpServletRequest request, HttpServletResponse response) throws ServletException, IOException {

    Jwt accessToken = (Jwt) request.getAttribute(BearerTokenFilter.ACCESS_TOKEN); // <1>
    request.setAttribute("email", accessToken.getClaims().get("sub")); // <2>
    request.setAttribute("userAttributes", accessToken.getClaims()); // <3>

    request.getRequestDispatcher("/WEB-INF/user-profile.jsp").forward(request, response);
}
----
<1> Pull the access token out of the request
<2> The "email" is in the "sub" claim
<3> Add the other token claims as attributes in order to render them in the `user-profile.jsp`
====

> == Test Out your Secure Application!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Test Out Your Secure Application!
```

Before restarting the servlet application, grab the "issuer" URL you used in the first step by copying it from `src/main/resources/application.yml`. You can also find this in your Okta Admin Console under **API** -> **Authorization Servers**.

> Now start the legacy application with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Start the legacy application with:
```

[source,text]
----
./mvnw jetty:run -Dokta.oauth2.issuer=${yourIssuer}
----

That is it! Open an incognito/private browser and navigate to `http://localhost:8080/` where you'll be redirected to Okta for login and then back to the profile page!

image::{% asset_path 'blog/oauth-legacy-spring-cloud-gateway/profile-screenshot.png' %}[alt=Profile screenshot ,width=600,align=center]

> == Learn More About Java Web Security!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Learn More About Java Web Security
```

Too many exclamation points in a row. ;)

> In this post, you have taken a simple servlet application and secured it with OAuth through just a few lines of code (plus a healthy dose of configuration and error handling). You also used Spring Cloud Gateway to proxy and secure requests before they even get to your application!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this post, you learned how to secure a simple servlet application with OAuth 2.0 and just a few lines of code (plus a healthy dose of configuration and error handling). You also used Spring Cloud Gateway to proxy and secure requests before they even get to your application!
```

> The full source code for this post is available on https://github.com/oktadeveloper/okta-legacy-with-cloud-gateway-example[GitHub].

Reviewer: Needs README

Author: Done!
